# Information Gathering

<br>

## 1. Introduction

**Information gathering** is the first step of any penetration test and is arguably the most important as all other phases rely on the information obtained about the target during the information gathering phase. 
Information gathering is typically broken down into **two types**:

**1) Passive Information Gathering**
Focuses on collecting data without direct interaction with the target, making it stealthy but sometimes less detailed, some examples below. 
- Identifying IP addresses & DNS information
- Domain names and domain ownership information
- Email addresses and social media profiles
- Web technologies being used on target sites
- Identifying subdomains

**2) Active Information Gathering** 
Involves gathering as much information as possible by actively engaging with the target system, providing more detailed information but with a higher risk of detection. For example:
- Discovering open ports on target systems
- Learning about the internal infrastructure of a target, network or organization
- Enumerating information from target systems

<br>

## 2. Passive Tools - Information Gathering

### 2.1. Host Command

The host command in Linux is a simple utility for performing DNS lookups. It can be used to find the IP address of a domain, perform reverse DNS lookups, query specific DNS record types, and more.

```shell
# Displays the manual (man) page for the host command
man host
```

### 2.2. robots.txt

Is a text file webmasters create to instruct web robots (typically search engine robots) how to crawl pages on their website. The file is part of the Robots Exclusion Protocol (REP), a group of web standards that regulate how robots crawl the web, access and index content, and serve that content up to users. The *robots.txt* file is placed in the root directory of the website and is publicly accessible by appending */robots.txt* to the end of a domain name. To check if a site has a robots.txt file, you can try navigating to "*<site_address>/robots.txt*". For more info, check the [Wiki page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robots.txt).

### 2.3. HTTrack

It allows users to download a World Wide Web site from the Internet to a local directory, building recursively all directories, getting HTML, images, and other files from the server to your computer, the proxy might not allow that. 
For more info, check [HTTrack website](https://www.httrack.com/).

### 2.4. Sublist3r

Is a python tool designed to enumerate subdomains of websites using OSINT. It helps penetration testers and bug hunters collect and gather subdomains for the domain they are targeting.
The GitHub page is [Sublist3r](https://github.com/aboul3la/Sublist3r).

### 2.5. Google Dorks

Is a hacker technique that uses Google Search and other Google applications to find security holes in the configuration and computer code that websites are using. Google Dorking is done directly within a web browser by entering specially crafted search queries into the Google search bar. Some useful resources are: 
- [Google dork cheatsheet](https://gist.github.com/sundowndev/283efaddbcf896ab405488330d1bbc06)
- [Exploit Database](https://www.exploit-db.com/google-hacking-database).

### 2.6. theHarvester

[theHarvester](https://github.com/laramies/theHarvester) is a tool designed to gather emails, names, subdomains, IPs, and URLs using multiple public sources like search engines and social networks.

### 2.7. have i been pwned?

[have i been pwned?](https://haveibeenpwned.com/) is a free online service created by cybersecurity expert Troy Hunt. The website allows users to check if their personal data, such as email addresses or phone numbers, have been compromised in known data breaches. The term "pwned" is internet slang for "owned" or "compromised".

<br> 

## 3. Active Tools - Information Gathering

### 3.1. NMAP

Is an open-source tool ([Nmap website](https://nmap.org/)) widely used in network security for discovering hosts and services on a computer network. It is one of the most popular tools in cybersecurity, employed by network administrators, security professionals, and hackers alike to perform network discovery and security auditing. The main key features of Nmap are:
- Host Discovery
- Port Scanning
- Service and Version Detection
- Operating System Detection
- Scripting Engine (NSE)
- Vulnerability Scanning
- Network Inventory
- Firewall and Intrusion Detection Evasion

### 3.2. Metasploit

[Metasploit](https://www.metasploit.com/) is a powerful open-source framework used for penetration testing, vulnerability assessment, and exploitation development. Developed by Rapid7, it allows security professionals and ethical hackers to identify, exploit, and validate vulnerabilities in systems and applications. It's widely used to test the security posture of networks by simulating real-world attacks.
Here are the key aspects of Metasploit:
- **Penetration Testing**: Metasploit helps security professionals simulate attacks against their systems. It automates the process of discovering vulnerabilities and launching exploits, which gives security teams a better understanding of how vulnerable their systems are.
- **Exploit Database**: The framework contains a vast and frequently updated exploit repository, which includes thousands of known exploits for various vulnerabilities across different platforms and applications. These exploits can be used to target systems and applications that have not been patched or secured properly.
- **Payloads**: A payload is the code that gets executed on a target system after a successful exploit. Metasploit allows users to choose from different payloads, such as opening a reverse shell, creating a backdoor, or gaining remote control of a system.
- **Post-Exploitation**: Once an exploit is successful, Metasploit enables users to perform various post-exploitation tasks, such as data extraction, privilege escalation, or further lateral movement within a compromised network.
- **Metasploit Modules**: Metasploit is highly modular, with different types of modules:
	- *Exploit Modules*: Used to target vulnerabilities and launch attacks.
	- *Payload Modules*: Define what happens after an exploit, such as opening a shell or installing malware.
	- *Auxiliary Modules*: Non-exploit functions like scanning, fuzzing, or enumeration.
	- *Post-Exploitation Modules*: Used after gaining access, to perform tasks like password dumping or network pivoting.
- **Armitage**: [Armitage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armitage_(computing)) is a graphical front-end for Metasploit, which makes it easier to use for users who prefer GUI over the command line.
- **Metasploit Console (*msfconsole*)**: The primary interface for Metasploit is its command-line console, which provides a powerful environment to interact with and configure exploits, payloads, and auxiliary functions.

### 3.3. DirBuster

**DirBuster** is a directory and file brute-forcing tool used by security professionals and penetration testers to discover hidden directories and files on web servers. It helps uncover web content that is not directly linked on websites, such as unlisted directories, sensitive files, or unprotected resources, which might contain vulnerabilities or sensitive information. 
Despite its popularity, DirBuster is not updated as frequently anymore, and users often use newer tools like **Gobuster** or **ffuf** for similar functionality.

### 3.4. Nikto

**Nikto** is an open-source web server scanner designed to identify potential security vulnerabilities in web servers. It performs comprehensive tests against web servers, checking for outdated software versions, vulnerable services, and misconfigurations. 
Nikto is widely used in penetration testing and vulnerability assessment to enhance web application security, though it may generate false positives and lacks stealth, meaning it can easily be detected by security systems.

### 3.5. WPScan

**WPScan** is a specialized security tool designed to scan WordPress websites for potential vulnerabilities. It focuses on identifying weaknesses and misconfigurations in WordPress core files, themes, and plugins. WPScan is widely used in penetration testing, vulnerability assessments, and security monitoring for WordPress installations. 

### 3.6. CrackMapExec

**CrackMapExec (CME)** is a powerful post-exploitation and penetration testing tool designed for assessing large networks, especially in Active Directory (AD) environments. It's commonly used by security professionals, red teams, and penetration testers for lateral movement, credential validation, and system enumeration. CME is known for its versatility in targeting and interacting with Windows networks and systems, making it a favorite for auditing Active Directory infrastructures.

### 3.7. Searchsploit

SearchSploit is a command-line utility that comes with the Exploit-DB repository, allowing users to search for known exploits and vulnerability information in offline mode. It is part of the "Exploit Database" maintained by Offensive Security and provides access to a large archive of publicly disclosed vulnerabilities, exploit code, and proof-of-concept (PoC) scripts.

### 3.8. Hydra

**Hydra** (also known as THC-Hydra) is a popular and powerful password-cracking tool designed for brute force and dictionary attacks on various network protocols and services. It is used by security professionals, penetration testers, and hackers to identify weak passwords in systems by trying different username and password combinations.
